How to Look at Jack Whitten’s Unforgettable Painting ‘9.11.01’
It's one of the most powerful paintings of recent times. Yet it still contains much to unpack.

A person with dark hair, viewed from the back, stands in a brightly lit art gallery with light wooden floors, looking at a large, horizontally oriented abstract painting on a white wall. The painting features a prominent, dark, textured triangular shape in the center, resembling a mountain or pyramid, set against a background of myriad small, colorful strokes and dots in shades of blue, white, and yellow. Below the central dark form, there are areas of more concentrated texture and color, with hints of orange, green, and gold. The overall impression of the artwork is complex and layered.
Jack Whitten, 9.11.01 (2006) in "Jack Whitten: The Messenger" at the Museum of Modern Art. Photo by Ben Davis.
by 
Ben Davis
April 30, 2025
Share Share This Article

Jack Whitten’s giant-sized mosaic-painting 9.11.01 (2006) is a famous painting that deserves to be still more famous.

I could write a whole essay about any number of the works in Whitten’s stately show at the Museum of Modern Art, but I’m going to focus on just this one. Because it rewards reflection. Because I think the way Whitten combines abstraction and history painting here is subtle. Most of all, because I think what he’s up to is misunderstood.

The best of Artnet News in your inbox.
Sign up for our daily newsletter.

It’s worth comparing 9.11.01 to another important painting: Pablo Picasso’s Guernica (1937). Both earn their size, using frieze-like scale to convey historical gravity. Nothing about Picasso’s screaming horse and weeping women literally render the 1936 Nazi bombing of the Basque hamlet of Gernika, just as nothing in Whitten’s seething abstraction directly renders the Al-Qaeda attack on the Twin Towers on September 11, 2001.

What do you really see when you stand before 9.11.01?

The work was made during the period when Whitten was experimenting with the potential of mosaic. Acrylic tiles form an orderly background. Against it, a huge pyramidal abstract shape is framed, dominating the center. It is an abyssal black. As opposed to the background, the tiles that make it up are cracked, irregular, chaotic.

A detail of Jack Whitten’s ’01.11.01’ (2006) features a large, dark, textured triangular shape against a backdrop of smaller, shimmering mosaic tiles. The contrast between the solid triangle and the fragmented background creates a dynamic and visually compelling abstract image.
Detail of Jack Whitten, 9.11.01 (2006). Photo by Ben Davis.

Four dagger-like spines, flecked with red, seem to erupt from the body of the pyramid, evoking explosions. Other patches, mainly around the lower part of the composition, suggest smoke or fumes. It is as if we were watching some immense volume frozen at the moment of disintegration.

Whitten was working at his studio on Lispenard Street, a block below Canal in Manhattan, on the morning of the attacks. He was on the street with firefighters, dealing with a gas leak in his studio building, when he saw the first plane slam into the north tower. There is even a short film by the documentarian Jules Naudet that was being shot on the street at the time, which shows that moment. (The voice you hear saying, “Holy shit! Holy shit!” is Whitten’s.)

Witnessing a sudden and horrible event of that magnitude marks you for a lifetime. Whitten swore his next painting after September 11 would be about it. He is quoted in the MoMA wall label saying that he wanted to pay tribute to the lives lost, and the painting itself is embedded with ash and other fragments of wreckage. Passages of the surface shimmer, a trace memory of the plume of glass fragments that he often recalled being the first thing that he saw after he watched the first plane strike, even before the flames and smoke.

A detail of Jack Whitten's "9.11.01" shows a textured, abstract composition of small, irregular tiles in muted grays, blues, yellows, and blacks, suggesting fragmented forms and a somber, reflective mood.
Detail of Jack Whitten, 9.11.01 (2006). Photo by Ben Davis.

Yet, because 9.11.01 is an abstract painting, its forms and atmosphere suggest a psychic cataclysm as much any kind of literal rendering of actual disaster. That black pyramid dominates the space, centered—a massive, ominous presence that fills your vision. You can’t look away. But the way Whitten has rendered it makes it subtly unstable. Whether it seems like something towering over you or veering away changes as your eyes scan the surface. It could be something glimpsed up close or from afar, a shadow or a void.

What this effectively captures, via abstraction, is the feeling of a traumatic memory: A memory that dominates you, that you can’t escape, even as it never quite adds up, fragmenting you as you try to put it together.

Then, within the abstraction, suddenly you find a very concrete detail that jars you in another direction: Planted at the heart of the chaotic, cracked black central triangle are bootprints. These suggest a whole other way to think about the kinds of feelings this surface is holding. They may be like a memory of the firefighters Whitten was with that morning, running away toward the inferno at Ground Zero. The artist recalled this sight many times in interviews. He said that he broke down in tears when he got the news, later, that those firefighters had survived.

A detailed section of Jack Whitten’s mosaic artwork ‘9.11.01. (2006) reveals a chaotic arrangement of diverse tiles with boot prints at the center. 
Detail of Jack Whitten, 9.11.01 (2006). Photo by Ben Davis.

Another detail is in the mix, near the bootprints: text fragments, cast in black. One says “Daily News,” and appears to be a copy of that tabloid, with its tagline, “New York’s Hometown Paper,” legible below. The other says, mysteriously, “REMEMBER YOUR COPY.” Given the nearby footprints, they at first evoke trash strewn on the ground. But it’s notable that these elements are rendered as ghostly black copies. The words stare flatly out at you, asking you to make sense of them.

What’s this all about? I have a guess.

A close-up Jack Whitten’s 9.11.01 (2006) wall features a mix of dark and light tiles, with prominent textured, dark gray rectangular pieces bearing the words “DAILY NEWS” and "REMEMBER YOUR COPY”. Patches of orange, green, and blue peek through the fragmented surface, suggesting a weathered or deliberately broken aesthetic.
Detail of Jack Whitten, 9.11.01 (2006). Photo by Ben Davis.

Here’s a way that 9.11.01 is different than Guernica: Picasso made his painting immediately, unveiling it as a very direct anti-fascist statement. Whitten, however, finished his painting long after the events to which it was responding. It took him five long years to create it. And by then the entire question of what September 11, 2001 meant had become much, much more fraught.

There is a reference behind the central form in the painting, not mentioned at MoMA and therefore invisible to me when I first saw it. Once you know it, it changes how you look at the work. Whitten’s big central pyramid is, in fact, inspired not by the Twin Towers, but by the pyramid on the dollar bill. “Blood, petroleum, [and] money [were] the three components that caused 9/11,” he said in 2009, enigmatically. That thematic trio, Whitten said, formed “the guiding conceptual principle for the painting.”

Now, to say that Al-Qaeda’s attack on the Twin Towers itself was motivated by “blood and petroleum” is odd—as suggestively odd as making a symbol from the U.S. currency the center of a painting about 9/11. It only makes sense if you are abstracting from the direct memory of the violent horror of the event itself, and thinking on some level about the larger geopolitical entanglements of the U.S. with the Middle East.

“No Blood For Oil” was a phrase you heard quite a lot in the streets back in the 2000s during protests of the Iraq War, launched by George W. Bush in 2003. “Never Forget” was another phrase you heard quite a lot—but by the time Whitten completed his personal memorial to the tragedy, the invocation of 9/11’s memory had been colored by the fact that Bush used lies about Saddam Hussein’s connection to the attack to launch the war. By 2006, Abu Ghraib and Fallujah had become household names.

Basically, I think that those small but prominent details—the oil-black simulacra of the “Daily News” and that odd, stray phrase, “REMEMBER YOUR COPY”—inject a note of doubt about how artistic memorialization can work, at a time when the image of what was being remembered was also being reshaped by media and politics. I suppose this interpretation might also give another meaning to those bootprints as well, making them less about the panic of the day itself and more about memory being stampeded over.

A visitor views Jack Whitten's large-scale mosaic painting "9.11.01" at MoMA. The artwork features a dark, central pyramid amidst a field of textured, colorful tiles, evoking the debris and chaos of the event.
Installation view of Jack Whitten, 9.11.01 (2006). Photo by Ben Davis.

One of the virtues of abstract art is that it can be multiple things at once; it can capture overlapping realities of emotional experience. The ambiguities of 9.11.01 are all productive, or should be, cutting against the tendency of traumatic memories to short-circuit thought and keep us from seeing what is really going on.

Whitten’s painting is among the most lasting memorials to the events of September 11, 2001 in U.S. art, an attempt to give dignified form to the raw horror of a moment, by someone who saw it first hand. It can be that and also contain suspicion about how the memory of September 11 is invoked, about how you have to wrestle with collective political meaning as well as direct personal memory. The painting is not a statement: “This is what September 11 means.” It’s a question: “What does September 11 mean?” It wants you to look carefully.

“Jack Whitten: The Messenger” is on view at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, through August 2.